<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Act I</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section>
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Act</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
			</h2>
			<section id="scene-1-1" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
				</h3>
				<p>A street in London.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaveston</b>, reading a letter that was brought him from the king.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaveston</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>“My father is deceas’d. Come, Gaveston,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And share the kingdom with thy dearest friend.”</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ah, words that make me surfeit with delight!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What greater bliss can hap to Gaveston</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than live and be the favourite of a king!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sweet prince, I come! these, thy amorous lines</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Might have enforc’d me to have swum from France,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, like Leander, gasp’d upon the sand,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So thou wouldst smile, and take me in thine arms.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The sight of London to my exil’d eyes</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is as Elysium to a new-come soul:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Not that I love the city or the men,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But that it harbours him I hold so dear⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The king, upon whose bosom let me lie,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And with the world be still at enmity.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What need the arctic people love star-light,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To whom the sun shines both by day and night?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Farewell base stooping to the lordly peers!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My knee shall bow to none but to the king.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As for the multitude, that are but sparks,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Rak’d up in embers of their poverty⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span><i xml:lang="it">Tanti,</i>⁠—I’ll fawn first on the wind,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That glanceth at my lips, and flieth away.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But how now! what are these?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter three <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Poor Men</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Poor Men</td>
							<td>Such as desire your worship’s service.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaveston</td>
							<td>What canst thou do?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Poor Man</td>
							<td>I can ride.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaveston</td>
							<td>But I have no horse.⁠—What art thou?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Poor Man</td>
							<td>A traveller.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaveston</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Let me see; thou wouldst do well</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To wait at my trencher, and tell me lies at dinner-time;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, as I like your discoursing, I’ll have you.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And what art thou?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Third Poor Man</td>
							<td>A soldier, that hath serv’d against the Scot.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaveston</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Why, there are hospitals for such as you:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I have no war; and therefore, sir, be gone.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Third Poor Man</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Farewell, and perish by a soldier’s hand,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That wouldst reward them with an hospital!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaveston</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside.</i> Ay, ay, these words of his move me as much</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As if a goose should play the porcupine,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And dart her plumes, thinking to pierce my breast.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But yet it is no pain to speak men fair;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll flatter these, and make them live in hope.⁠—</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>You know that I came lately out of France,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And yet I have not view’d my lord the king:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If I speed well, I’ll entertain you all.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">All</td>
							<td>We thank your worship.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaveston</td>
							<td>I have some business: leave me to myself.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">All</td>
							<td>We will wait here about the court.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaveston</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Do. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt Poor Men.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>These are not men for me;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I must have wanton poets, pleasant wits,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Musicians, that with touching of a string</span>
									<br/>
									<span>May draw the pliant king which way I please:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Music and poetry is his delight;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Therefore I’ll have Italian masks by night,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sweet speeches, comedies, and pleasing shows;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And in the day, when he shall walk abroad,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Like sylvan nymphs my pages shall be clad;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My men, like satyrs grazing on the lawns,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall with their goat-feet dance the antic hay;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sometime a lovely boy in Dian’s shape,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With hair that gilds the water as it glides</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Crownets of pearl about his naked arms,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And in his sportful hands an olive-tree,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To hide those parts which men delight to see,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall bathe him in a spring; and there, hard by,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>One like Actæon, peeping through the grove,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall by the angry goddess be transform’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And running in the likeness of an hart,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By yelping hounds pull’d down, shall semm to die:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Such things as these best please his majesty.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Here comes my lord the king, and the nobles,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From the parliament. I’ll stand aside. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Retires.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Kent</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lancaster</b>, the elder <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Mortimer</b>, the younger <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Mortimer</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Pembroke</b>, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Attendants</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td>Lancaster!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lancaster</td>
							<td>My lord?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaveston</td>
							<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside.</i> That Earl of Lancaster do I abhor.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Will you not grant me this? <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside.</i> In spite of them</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll have my will; and these two Mortimers,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That cross me thus, shall know I am displeased.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elder Mortimer</td>
							<td>If you love us, my lord, hate Gaveston.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaveston</td>
							<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside.</i> That villain Mortimer! I’ll be his death.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Mine uncle here, this earl, and I myself,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Were sworn to your father at his death,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That he should ne’er return into the realm:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And now, my lord, ere I will break my oath,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This sword of mine, that should offend your foes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall sleep within the scabbard at thy need,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And underneath thy banners march who will,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For Mortimer will hang his armour up.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaviston</td>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside.</i>
								<i xml:lang="fr">Mort dieu!</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Well, Mortimer, I’ll make thee rue these words:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Beseems it thee to contradict thy king?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Frown’st thou thereat, aspiring Lancaster?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The sword shall plane the furrows of thy brows,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And hew these knees that now are grown so stiff.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I will have Gaveston; and you shall know</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What danger ’tis to stand against your king.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaviston</td>
							<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside.</i> Well done, Ned!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lancaster</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My lord, why do you thus incense your peers,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That naturally would love and honour you,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But for that base and obscure Gaveston?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Four earldoms have I, besides Lancaster⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Derby, Salisbury, Lincoln, Leicester;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>These will I sell, to give my soldiers pay,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ere Gaveston shall stay within the realm:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Therefore, if he be come, expel him straight.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Kent</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Barons and earls, your pride hath made me mute;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But know I’ll speak, and to the proof, I hope.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I do remember, in my father’s days,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lord Percy of the North, being highly mov’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Brav’d Mowbray in presence of the king;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For which, had not his highness lov’d him well,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He should have lost his head; but with his look</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Th’ undaunted spirit of Percy was appeas’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And Mowbray and he were reconcil’d:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet dare you brave the king unto his face.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Brother, revenge it, and let these their heads</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Preach upon poles, for trespass of their tongues.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td>O, our heads!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td>Ay, yours; and therefore I would wish you grant.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td>Bridle thy anger, gentle Mortimer.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I cannot, nor I will not; I must speak.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Cousin, our hands I hope shall fence our heads,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And strike off his that makes you threaten us.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Come, uncle, let us leave the brain-sick king,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And henceforth parley with our naked swords.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elder Mortimer</td>
							<td>Wiltshire hath men enough to save our heads.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td>All Warwickshire will leave him for my sake.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lancaster</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And northward Lancaster hath many friends.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Adieu, my lord; and either change your mind,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or look to see the throne, where you should sit,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To float in blood, and at thy wanton head</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The glozing head of thy base minion thrown.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt all except <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Kent</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaveston</b>, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Attendants</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I cannot brook these haughty menaces:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Am I a king, and must be over-rul’d!⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Brother, display my ensigns in the field:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll bandy with the barons and the earls,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And either die or live with Gaveston.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaveston</td>
							<td>I can no longer keep me from my lord. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Comes forward.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What, Gaveston! welcome! Kiss not my hand:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Embrace me, Gaveston, as I do thee.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Why shouldst thou kneel? know’st thou not who I am?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy friend, thyself, another Gaveston:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Not Hylas was more mourned for of Hercules</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than thou hast been of me since thy exile.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaveston</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And, since I went from hence, no soul in hell</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hath felt more torment than poor Gaveston.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I know it.⁠—Brother, welcome home my friend.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now let the treacherous Mortimers conspire,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And that high-minded Earl of Lancaster:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I have my wish, in that I joy thy sight;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And sooner shall the sea o’erwhelm my land</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than bear the ship that shall transport thee hence.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I here create thee Lord High-chamberlain,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Chief Secretary to the state and me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Earl of Cornwall, King and Lord of Man.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaveston</td>
							<td>My lord, these titles far exceed my worth.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Kent</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Brother, the least of these may well suffice</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For one of greater birth than Gaveston.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Cease, brother, for I cannot brook these words.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy worth, sweet friend, is far above my gifts:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Therefore, to equal it, receive my heart.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If for these dignities thou be envied,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll give thee more; for, but to honour thee,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is Edward pleas’d with kingly regiment.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fear’st thou thy person? thou shalt have a guard:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wantest thou gold? go to my treasury:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wouldst thou be lov’d and fear’d? receive my seal,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Save or condemn, and in our name command</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What so thy mind affects, or fancy likes.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaveston</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>It shall suffice me to enjoy your love;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which whiles I have, I think myself as great</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As Cæsar riding in the Roman street,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With captive kings at his triumphant car.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Bishop of Coventry</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td>Whither goes my Lord of Coventry so fast?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bishop of Coventry</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>To celebrate your father’s exequies.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But is that wicked Gaveston return’d?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ay, priest, and lives to be reveng’d on thee,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That wert the only cause of his exile.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaveston</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>’Tis true; and, but for reverence of these robes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou shouldst not plod one foot beyond this place.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bishop of Coventry</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I did no more than I was bound to do:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, Gaveston, unless thou be reclaim’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As then I did incense the parliament,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So will I now, and thou shalt back to France.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaveston</td>
							<td>Saving your reverence, you must pardon me.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Throw off his golden mitre, rend his stole,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And in the channel christen him anew.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Kent</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ay, brother, lay not violent hands on him!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For he’ll complain unto the see of Rome.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaveston</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Let him complain unto the see of hell:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll be reveng’d on him for my exile.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>No, spare his life, but seize upon his goods:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be thou lord bishop, and receive his rents,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And make him serve thee as thy chaplain:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I give him thee; here, use him as thou wilt.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaveston</td>
							<td>He shall to prison, and there die in bolts.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td>Ay, to the Tower, the Fleet, or where thou wilt.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bishop of Coventry</td>
							<td>For this offence be thou accurs’d of God!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td>Who’s there? Convey this priest to the Tower.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bishop of Coventry</td>
							<td>True, true.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>But, in the meantime, Gaveston, away,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And take possession of his house and goods.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Come, follow me, and thou shalt have my guard</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To see it done, and bring thee safe again.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaveston</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What should a priest do with so fair a house?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A prison may beseem his holiness. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-1-2" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Westminster.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter on the one side the two <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Mortimers</b>; on the other, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lancaster</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>’Tis true, the bishop is in the Tower,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And goods and body given to Gaveston.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lancaster</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What, will they tyrannise upon the church?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ah, wicked King! accursed Gaveston!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This ground, which is corrupted with their steps,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall be their timeless sepulchre or mine.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Well, let that peevish Frenchman guard him sure;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unless his breast be sword-proof, he shall die.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elder Mortimer</td>
							<td>How now! why droops the Earl of Lancaster?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td>Wherefore is Guy of Warwick discontent?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lancaster</td>
							<td>That villain Gaveston is made an earl.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elder Mortimer</td>
							<td>An earl!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ay, and besides Lord-chamberlain of the realm,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And Secretary too, and Lord of Man.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elder Mortimer</td>
							<td>We may not nor we will not suffer this.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td>Why post we not from hence to levy men?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lancaster</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>“My Lord of Cornwall” now at every word;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And happy is the man whom he vouchsafes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For vailing of his bonnet, one good look.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thus, arm in arm, the king and he doth march:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nay, more, the guard upon his lordship waits,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And all the court begins to flatter him.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thus leaning on the shoulder of the king,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He nods, and scorns, and smiles at those that pass.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elder Mortimer</td>
							<td>Doth no man take exceptions at the slave?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lancaster</td>
							<td>All stomach him, but none dare speak a word.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ah, that bewrays their baseness, Lancaster!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Were all the earls and barons of my mind,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We’d hale him from the bosom of the king,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And at the court-gate hang the peasant up,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who, swoln with venom of ambitious pride,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Will be the ruin of the realm and us.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td>Here comes my Lord of Canterbury’s grace.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lancaster</td>
							<td>His countenance bewrays he is displeas’d.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Archbishop of Canterbury</b>, and an <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Attendant</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Archbishop of Canterbury</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>First, were his sacred garments rent and torn;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then laid they violent hands upon him; next,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Himself imprison’d, and his goods asseiz’d:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This certify the Pope: away, take horse. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit Attendant.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lancaster</td>
							<td>My lord, will you take arms against the king?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Archbishop of Canterbury</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What need I? God himself is up in arms</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When violence is offer’d to the church.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Then will you join with us, that be his peers,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To banish or behead that Gaveston?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Archbishop of Canterbury</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What else, my lords? for it concerns me near;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The bishoprick of Coventry is his.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Isabella</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td>Madam, whither walks your majesty so fast?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Isabella</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Unto the forest, gentle Mortimer,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To live in grief and baleful discontent;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For now my lord the king regards me not,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But dotes upon the love of Gaveston:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He claps his cheeks, and hangs about his neck,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Smiles in his face, and whispers in his ears;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, when I come, he frowns, as who should say,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>“Go whither thou wilt, seeing I have Gaveston.”</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elder Mortimer</td>
							<td>Is it not strange that he is thus bewitch’d?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Madam, return unto the court again:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That sly inveigling Frenchman we’ll exile,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or lose our lives; and yet, ere that day come,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The king shall lose his crown; for we have power,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And courage too, to be reveng’d at full.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Archbishop of Canterbury</td>
							<td>But yet lift not your swords against the king.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lancaster</td>
							<td>No; but we will lift Gaveston from hence.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td>And war must be the means, or he’ll stay still.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Isabella</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Then let him stay; for, rather than my lord</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall be oppress’d with civil mutinies,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I will endure a melancholy life,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And let him frolic with his minion.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Archbishop of Canterbury</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My lords, to ease all this, but hear me speak:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We and the rest, that are his counsellors,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Will meet, and with a general consent</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Confirm his banishment with our hands and seals.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lancaster</td>
							<td>What we confirm the king will frustrate.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td>Then may we lawfully revolt from him.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td>But say, my lord, where shall this meeting be?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Archbishop of Canterbury</td>
							<td>At the New Temple.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td>Content.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Archbishop of Canterbury</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And, in the meantime, I’ll entreat you all</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To cross to Lambeth, and there stay with me.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lancaster</td>
							<td>Come, then, let’s away.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td>Madam, farewell.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Isabella</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Farewell, sweet Mortimer, and, for my sake,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Forbear to levy arms against the king.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td>Ay, if words will serve; if not, I must.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-1-3" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
				</h3>
				<p>A street in London.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaviston</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Kent</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaveston</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Edmund, the mighty prince of Lancaster,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That hath more earldoms than an ass can bear,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And both the Mortimers, two goodly men,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With Guy of Warwick, that redoubted knight,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are gone towards Lambeth⁠—</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Kent</td>
							<td>There let them remain.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-1-3" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</span>
				</h3>
				<p>The New Temple.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lancaster</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Pembroke</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Elder Mortimer</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</b>, the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Archbishop of Canterbury</b>, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Attendants</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lancaster</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Here is the form of Gaveston’s exile;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>May it please your lordship to subscribe your name.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Archbishop of Canterbury</td>
							<td>Give me the paper. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">He subscribes, as the others do after him.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lancaster</td>
							<td>Quick, quick, my lord; I long to write my name.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td>But I long more to see him banish’d hence.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The name of Mortimer shall fright the king,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unless he be declin’d from that base peasant.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaveston</b>, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Kent</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What, are you mov’d that Gaveston sits here?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It is our pleasure; we will have it so.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lancaster</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Your grace doth well to place him by your side,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For nowhere else the new earl is so safe.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elder Mortimer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What man of noble birth can brook this sight?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>
										<i xml:lang="la">Quam male conveniunt!⁠—</i>
									</span>
									<br/>
									<span>See, what a scornful look the peasant casts!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pembroke</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Can kingly lions fawn on creeping ants?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ignoble vassal, that, like Phaeton,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Aspir’st unto the guidance of the sun!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Their downfall is at hand, their forces down:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We will not thus be fac’d and over-peer’d.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Lay hands on that traitor Mortimer!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elder Mortimer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Lay hands on that traitor Gaveston!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Kent</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Is this the duty that you owe your king?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>We know our duties; let him know his peers.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Whither will you bear him? stay, or ye shall die.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elder Mortimer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>We are no traitors; therefore threaten not.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaveston</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>No, threaten not, my lord, but pay them home.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Were I a king⁠—</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thou, villain! wherefore talk’st thou of a king,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That hardly art a gentleman by birth?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Were he a peasant, being my minion,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll make the proudest of you stoop to him.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lancaster</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My lord⁠—you may not thus disparage us.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Away, I say, with hateful Gaveston!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elder Mortimer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And with the Earl of Kent that favours him.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>
										<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Attendants remove Gaveston and Kent.</i>
									</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Nay, then, lay violent hands upon your king:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Here, Mortimer, sit thou in Edward’s throne;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Warwick and Lancaster, wear you my crown.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Was ever king thus over-rul’d as I?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lancaster</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Learn, then, to rule us better, and the realm.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What we have done, our heart-blood shall maintain.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Think you that we can brook this upstart[‘s] pride?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Anger and wrathful fury stops my speech.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Archbishop of Canterbury</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Why are you not mov’d? be patient, my lord,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And see what we your counsellors have done.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My lords, now let us all be resolute,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And either have our wills, or lose our lives.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Meet you for this, proud over-daring peers!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ere my sweet Gaveston shall part from me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This isle shall fleet upon the ocean,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And wander to the unfrequented Inde.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Archbishop of Canterbury</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>You know that I am legate to the Pope:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>On your allegiance to the see of Rome,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Subscribe, as we have done, to his exile.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Curse him, if he refuse; and then may we</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Depose him, and elect another king.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ay, there it goes! but yet I will not yield:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Curse me, depose me, do the worst you can.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lancaster</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Then linger not, my lord, but do it straight.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Archbishop of Canterbury</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Remember how the bishop was abus’d:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Either banish him that was the cause thereof,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or I will presently discharge these lords</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of duty and allegiance due to thee.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>It boots me not to threat; I must speak fair:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The legate of the Pope will be obey’d.⁠— <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>My lord, you shall be Chancellor of the realm;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou, Lancaster, High-Admiral of our fleet;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Young Mortimer and his uncle shall be earls;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And you, Lord Warwick, President of the North;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And thou of Wales. If this content you not,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Make several kingdoms of this monarchy,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And share it equally amongst you all,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So I may have some nook or corner left,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To frolic with my dearest Gaveston.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Archbishop of Canterbury</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Nothing shall alter us; we are resolv’d.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lancaster</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Come, come, subscribe.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Why should you love him whom the world hates so?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Because he loves me more than all the world.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ah, none but rude and savage-minded men</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Would seek the ruin of my Gaveston!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You that be noble-born should pity him.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>You that are princely-born should shake him off:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For shame, subscribe, and let the clown depart.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elder Mortimer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Urge him, my lord.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Archbishop of Canterbury</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Are you content to banish him the realm?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I see I must, and therefore am content:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Instead of ink, I’ll write it with my tears. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Subscribes.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td>The king is love-sick for his minion.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td>’Tis done: and now, accursed hand, fall off!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lancaster</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Give it me: I’ll have it publish’d in the streets.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I’ll see him presently despatch’d away.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Archbishop of Canterbury</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Now is my heart at ease.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And so is mine.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pembroke</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>This will be good news to the common sort.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elder Mortimer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Be it or no, he shall not linger here.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>
										<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt all except King Edward.</i>
									</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>How fast they run to banish him I love!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They would not stir, were it to do me good.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Why should a king be subject to a priest?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Proud Rome, that hatchest such imperial grooms,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With these thy superstitious taper-lights,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wherewith thy antichristian churches blaze,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll fire thy crazed buildings, and enforce</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The papal towers to kiss the lowly ground,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With slaughter’d priests make Tiber’s channel swell,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And banks rais’d higher with their sepulchres!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As for the peers, that back the clergy thus,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If I be king, not one of them shall live.</span>
									<br/>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Re-enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaveston</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaveston</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My lord, I hear it whisper’d everywhere,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That I am banish’d and must fly the land.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>’Tis true, sweet Gaveston: O were it false!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The legate of the Pope will have it so,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And thou must hence, or I shall be depos’d.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But I will reign to be reveng’d of them;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And therefore, sweet friend, take it patiently.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Live where thou wilt, I’ll send thee gold enough;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And long thou shalt not stay; or, if thou dost,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll come to thee; my love shall ne’er decline.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaveston</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Is all my hope turn’d to this hell of grief?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Rend not my heart with thy too-piercing words:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou from this land, I from myself am banish’d.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaveston</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>To go from hence grieves not poor Gaveston;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But to forsake you, in whose gracious looks</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The blessedness of Gaveston remains;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For nowhere else seeks he felicity.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And only this torments my wretched soul,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That, whether I will or no, thou must depart.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be governor of Ireland in my stead,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And there abide till fortune call thee home.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Here, take my picture, and let me wear thine:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>
										<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">They exchange pictures.</i>
									</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O, might I keep thee here, as I do this,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Happy were I! but now most miserable.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaveston</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>’Tis something to be pitied of a king.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thou shalt not hence; I’ll hide thee, Gaveston.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaveston</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I shall be found, and then ’twill grieve me more.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Kind words and mutual talk makes our grief greater:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Therefore, with dumb embracement, let us part,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Stay, Gaveston; I cannot leave thee thus.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaveston</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>For every look, my love drops down a tear:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Seeing I must go, do not renew my sorrow.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The time is little that thou hast to stay,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, therefore, give me leave to look my fill.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But, come, sweet friend; I’ll bear thee on thy way.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaveston</td>
							<td>The peers will frown.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I pass not for their anger. Come, let’s go:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O, that we might as well return as go!</span>
									<br/>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Isabella</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Isabella</td>
							<td>Whither goes my lord?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td>Fawn not on me, French strumpet; get thee gone!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Isabella</td>
							<td>On whom but on my husband should I fawn?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaveston</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>On Mortimer; with whom, ungentle queen⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I judge no more⁠—judge you the rest, my lord.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Isabella</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>In saying this, thou wrong’st me, Gaveston:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is’t not enough that thou corrupt’st my lord,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And art a bawd to his affections,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But thou must call mine honour thus in question?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaveston</td>
							<td>I mean not so; your grace must pardon me.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thou art too familiar with that Mortimer,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And by thy means is Gaveston exil’d:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But I would wish thee reconcile the lords,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or thou shalt ne’er be reconcil’d to me.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Isabella</td>
							<td>Your highness knows, it lies not in my power.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td>Away, then! touch me not.⁠—Come, Gaveston.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Isabella</td>
							<td>Villain, ’tis thou that robb’st me of my lord.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaveston</td>
							<td>Madam, ’tis you that rob me of my lord.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td>Speak not unto her: let her droop and pine.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Isabella</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Wherein, my lord, have I deserv’d these words?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Witness the tears that Isabella sheds,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Witness this heart, that, sighing for thee, breaks,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How dear my lord is to poor Isabel!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And witness heaven how dear thou art to me:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There weep; for, till my Gaveston be repeal’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Assure thyself thou com’st not in my sight.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>
										<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt King Edward and Gaveston.</i>
									</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Isabella</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O miserable and distressed queen!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Would, when I left sweet France, and was embarked,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That charming Circe, walking on the waves,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Had chang’d my shape! or at the marriage-day</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The cup of Hymen had been full of poison!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or with those arms, that twin’d about my neck,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I had been stifled, and not liv’d to see</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The king my lord thus to abandon me!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Like frantic Juno, will I fill the earth</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With ghastly murmur of my sighs and cries;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For never doted Jove on Ganymede</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So much as he on cursed Gaveston:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But that will more exasperate his wrath;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I must entreat him, I must speak him fair,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And be a means to call home Gaveston:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And yet he’ll ever dote on Gaveston;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And so am I for ever miserable.</span>
									<br/>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Re-enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lancaster</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Pembroke</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Elder Mortimer</b>, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</b></i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lancaster</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Look, where the sister of the king of France</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sits wringing of her hands and beats her breast!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td>The king, I fear, hath ill-treated her.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pembroke</td>
							<td>Hard is the heart that injures such a saint.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td>I know ’tis ‘long of Gaveston she weeps.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elder Mortimer</td>
							<td>Why, he is gone.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td>Madam, how fares your grace?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Isabella</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ah, Mortimer, now breaks the king’s hate forth,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And he confesseth that he loves me not!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td>Cry quittance, madam, then, and love not him.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Isabella</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>No, rather will I die a thousand deaths:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And yet I love in vain; he’ll ne’er love me.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lancaster</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Fear ye not, madam; now his minion’s gone,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His wanton humour will be quickly left.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Isabella</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O, never, Lancaster! I am enjoin’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To sue unto you all for his repeal:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This wills my lord, and this must I perform,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or else be banish’d from his highness’ presence.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lancaster</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>For his repeal, madam! he comes not back,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unless the sea cast up his shipwreck’d body.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And to behold so sweet a sight as that,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There’s none here but would run his horse to death.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td>But, madam, would you have us call him home?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Isabella</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ay, Mortimer, for, till he be restor’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The angry king hath banish’d me the court;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, therefore, as thou lov’st and tender’st me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be thou my advocate unto these peers.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td>What, would you have me plead for Gaveston?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elder Mortimer</td>
							<td>Plead for him that will, I am resolv’d.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lancaster</td>
							<td>And so am I, my lord: dissuade the queen.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Isabella</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O, Lancaster, let him dissuade the king!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For ’tis against my will he should return.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td>Then speak not for him; let the peasant go.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Isabella</td>
							<td>’Tis for myself I speak, and not for him.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pembroke</td>
							<td>No speaking will prevail; and therefore cease.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Fair queen, forbear to angle for the fish</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which, being caught, strikes him that takes it dead;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I mean that vile torpedo, Gaveston,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That now, I hope, floats on the Irish seas.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Isabella</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Sweet Mortimer, sit down by me a while,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And I will tell thee reasons of such weight</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As thou wilt soon subscribe to his repeal.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td>It is impossible: but speak your mind.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Isabella</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Then, thus;⁠—but none shall hear it but ourselves.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>
										<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Talks to Younger Mortimer. apart.</i>
									</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lancaster</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My lords, albeit the queen win Mortimer,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Will you be resolute and hold with me?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elder Mortimer</td>
							<td>Not I, against my nephew.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pembroke</td>
							<td>Fear not; the queen’s words cannot alter him.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td>No? do but mark how earnestly she pleads!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lancaster</td>
							<td>And see how coldly his looks make denial!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td>She smiles: now, for my life, his mind is chang’d!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lancaster</td>
							<td>I’ll rather lose his friendship, I, than grant.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Well, of necessity it must be so.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My lords, that I abhor base Gaveston</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I hope your honours make no question.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And therefore, though I plead for his repeal,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>’Tis not for his sake, but to our avail;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nay, for the realm’s behoof, and for the king’s.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lancaster</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Fie, Mortimer, dishonour not thyself!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Can this be true, ’twas good to banish him?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And is this true, to call him home again?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Such reasons make white black, and dark night day.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td>My Lord of Lancaster, mark the respect.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lancaster</td>
							<td>In no respect can contraries be true.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Isabella</td>
							<td>Yet, good my lord, hear what he can allege.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td>All that he speaks is nothing; we are resolv’d.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td>Do you not wish that Gaveston were dead?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pembroke</td>
							<td>I would he were!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td>Why, then, my lord, give me but leave to speak.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elder Mortimer</td>
							<td>But, nephew, do not play the sophister.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>This which I urge is of a burning zeal</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To mend the king and do our country good.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Know you not Gaveston hath store of gold,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which may in Ireland purchase him such friends</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As he will front the mightiest of us all?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And whereas he shall live and be belov’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>’Tis hard for us to work his overthrow.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td>Mark you but that, my lord of Lancaster.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>But, were he here, detested as he is,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How easily might some base slave be suborn’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To greet his lordship with a poniard,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And none so much as blame the murderer,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But rather praise him for that brave attempt,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And in the chronicle enrol his name</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For purging of the realm of such a plague!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pembroke</td>
							<td>He saith true.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lancaster</td>
							<td>Ay, but how chance this was not done before?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Because, my lords, it was not thought upon.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nay, more, when he shall know it lies in us</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To banish him, and then to call him home,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>’Twill make him vail the top flag of his pride,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And fear to offend the meanest nobleman.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elder Mortimer</td>
							<td>But how if he do not, nephew?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Then may we with some colour rise in arms;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For, howsoever we have borne it out,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>’Tis treason to be up against the king;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So shall we have the people of our side,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which, for his father’s sake, lean to the king,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But cannot brook a night-grown mushroom,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Such a one as my Lord of Cornwall is,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Should bear us down of the nobility:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, when the commons and the nobles join,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>’Tis not the king can buckler Gaveston;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We’ll pull him from the strongest hold he hath.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My lords, if to perform this I be slack,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Think me as base a groom as Gaveston.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lancaster</td>
							<td>On that condition Lancaster will grant.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td>And so will Pembroke and I.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elder Mortimer</td>
							<td>And I.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>In this I count me highly gratified,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And Mortimer will rest at your command.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Isabella</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And when this favour Isabel forgets,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then let her live abandon’d and forlorn.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But see, in happy time, my lord the king,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Having brought the Earl of Cornwall on his way,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is new return’d. This news will glad him much:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet not so much as me; I love him more</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than he can Gaveston: would he lov’d me</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But half so much! then were I treble-blest.</span>
									<br/>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Re-enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</b>, mourning.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>He’s gone, and for his absence thus I mourn:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Did never sorrow go so near my heart</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As doth the want of my sweet Gaveston;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, could my crown’s revenue bring him back,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I would freely give it to his enemies,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And think I gain’d, having bought so dear a friend.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Isabella</td>
							<td>Hark, how he harps upon his minion!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My heart is as an anvil unto sorrow,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which beats upon it like the Cyclops’ hammers,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And with the noise turns up my giddy brain,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And makes me frantic for my Gaveston.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ah, had some bloodless Fury rose from hell,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And with my kingly sceptre struck me dead,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When I was forc’d to leave my Gaveston!</span>
									<br/>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lancaster</td>
							<td><i xml:lang="es">Diablo,</i> what passions call you these?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Isabella</td>
							<td>My gracious lord, I come to bring you news.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td>That you have parled with your Mortimer?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Isabella</td>
							<td>That Gaveston, my lord, shall be repeal’d.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td>Repeal’d! the news is too sweet to be true.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Isabella</td>
							<td>But will you love me, if you find it so?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td>If it be so, what will not Edward do?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Isabella</td>
							<td>For Gaveston, but not for Isabel.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>For thee, fair queen, if thou lov’st Gaveston;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll hang a golden tongue about thy neck,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Seeing thou hast pleaded with so good success.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Isabella</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>No other jewels hang about my neck</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than these, my lord; nor let me have more wealth</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than I may fetch from this rich treasury.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O, how a kiss revives poor Isabel!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Once more receive my hand; and let this be</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A second marriage ’twixt thyself and me.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Isabella</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And may it prove more happy than the first!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My gentle lord, bespeak these nobles fair,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That wait attendance for a gracious look,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And on their knees salute your majesty.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Courageous Lancaster, embrace thy king;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, as gross vapours perish by the sun,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Even so let hatred with thy sovereign’s smile:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Live thou with me as my companion.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lancaster</td>
							<td>This salutation overjoys my heart.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Warwick shall be my chiefest counsellor:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>These silver hairs will more adorn my court</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than gaudy silks or rich embroidery.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Chide me, sweet Warwick, if I go astray.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td>Slay me, my lord, when I offend your grace.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>In solemn triumphs and in public shows</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Pembroke shall bear the sword before the king.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pembroke</td>
							<td>And with this sword Pembroke will fight for you.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>But wherefore walks young Mortimer aside?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be thou commander of our royal fleet;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or, if that lofty office like thee not,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I make thee here Lord Marshal of the realm.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My lord, I’ll marshal so your enemies,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As England shall be quiet, and you safe.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And as for you, Lord Mortimer of Chirke,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose great achievements in our foreign war</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Deserve no common place nor mean reward,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be you the general of the levied troops</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That now are ready to assail the Scots.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elder Mortimer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>In this your grace hath highly honour’d me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For with my nature war doth best agree.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Isabella</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Now is the king of England rich and strong,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Having the love of his renowmed peers.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ay, Isabel, ne’er was my heart so light.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Clerk of the crown, direct our warrant forth,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For Gaveston, to Ireland!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Beaumont</b> with warrant.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Beaumont, fly</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As fast as Iris or Jove’s Mercury.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Beaumont</td>
							<td>It shall be done, my gracious lord. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Lord Mortimer, we leave you to your charge.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now let us in, and feast it royally.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Against our friend the Earl of Cornwall comes</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We’ll have a general tilt and tournament;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And then his marriage shall be solemnis’d;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For wot you not that I have made him sure</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unto our cousin, the Earl of Glocester’s heir?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lancaster</td>
							<td>Such news we hear, my lord.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>That day, if not for him, yet for my sake,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who in the triumph will be challenger,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Spare for no cost; we will requite your love.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td>In this or aught your highness shall command us.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td>Thanks, gentle Warwick. Come, lets in and revel.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt all except <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Elder Mortimer</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elder Mortimer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Nephew, I must to Scotland; thou stay’st here.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Leave now to oppose thyself against the king:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou seest by nature he is mild and calm;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, seeing his mind so dotes on Gaveston,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let him without controlment have his will.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The mightiest kings have had their minions;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Great Alexander lov’d Hephæstion,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The conquering Hercules for Hylas wept,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And for Patroclus stern Achilles droop’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And not kings only, but the wisest men;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The Roman Tully lov’d Octavius,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Grave Socrates wild Alcibiades.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then let his grace, whose youth is flexible,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And promiseth as much as we can wish,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Freely enjoy that vain light-headed earl;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For riper years will wean him from such toys.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Uncle, his wanton humour grieves not me;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But this I scorn, that one so basely-born</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Should by his sovereign’s favour grow so pert,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And riot it with the treasure of the realm,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>While soldiers mutiny for want of pay.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He wears a lord’s revenue on his back,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, Midas-like, he jets it in the court,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With base outlandish cullions at his heels,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose proud fantastic liveries make such show</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As if that Proteus, god of shapes, appear’d.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I have not seen a dapper Jack so brisk:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He wears a short Italian hooded cloak,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Larded with pearl, and in his Tuscan cap</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A jewel of more value than the crown.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>While others walk below, the king and he,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From out a window, laugh at such as we,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And flout our train, and jest at our attire.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Uncle, ’tis this that makes me impatient.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Elder Mortimer</td>
							<td>But, nephew, now you see the king is chang’d.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Then so I am, and live to do him service:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But, whiles I have a sword, a hand, a heart,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I will not yield to any such upstart.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You know my mind: come, uncle, let’s away.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
