<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Act V</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="act-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Act</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</span>
			</h2>
			<section id="scene-5-1" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Kenilworth Castle.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Leicester</b>, the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Bishop of Winchester</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Trussel</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leicester</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Be patient, good my lord, cease to lament;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Imagine Killingworth Castle were your court,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And that you lay for pleasure here a space,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Not of compulsion or necessity.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Leicester, if gentle words might comfort me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy speeches long ago had eas’d my sorrows,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For kind and loving hast thou always been.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The griefs of private men are soon allay’d;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But not of kings. The forest deer, being struck,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Runs to an herb that closeth up the wounds:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But when the imperial lion’s flesh is gor’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He rends and tears it with his wrathful paw,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, highly scorning that the lowly earth</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Should drink his blood, mounts up to the air:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And so it fares with me, whose dauntless mind</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Th’ ambitious Mortimer would seek to curb,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And that unnatural queen, false Isabel,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That thus hath pent and mew’d me in a prison</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For such outrageous passions cloy my soul,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As with the wings of rancour and disdain</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Full often am I soaring up to heaven,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To plain me to the gods against them both.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But when I call to mind I am a king,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Methinks I should revenge me of my wrongs,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That Mortimer and Isabel have done.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But what are kings, when regiment is gone,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But perfect shadows in a sunshine day?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My nobles rule; I bear the name of king,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I wear the crown; but am controll’d by them,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By Mortimer, and my unconstant queen,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who spots my nuptial bed with infamy;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whilst I am lodg’d within this cave of care,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where sorrow at my elbow still attends,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To company my heart with sad laments,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That bleeds within me for this strange exchange.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But tell me, must I now resign my crown,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To make usurping Mortimer a king?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bishop of Winchester</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Your grace mistakes; it is for England’s good,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And princely Edward’s right, we crave the crown.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>No, ’tis for Mortimer, not Edward’s head</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For he’s a lamb, emcompassed by wolves,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which in a moment will abridge his life.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But, if proud Mortimer do wear this crown,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Heavens turn it to a blaze of quenchless fire!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or, like the snaky wreath of Tisiphon,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Engirt the temples of his hateful head!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So shall not England’s vine be perished,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But Edward’s name survive, though Edward dies.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leicester</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My lord, why waste you thus the time away?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They stay your answer: will you yield your crown?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ah, Leicester, weigh how hardly I can brook</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To lose my crown and kingdom without cause;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To give ambitious Mortimer my right,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That, like a mountain, overwhelms my bliss;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In which extreme my mind here murder’d is!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But that the heavens appoint I must obey.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Here, take my crown; the life of Edward too: <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Taking off the crown.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>Two kings in England cannot reign at once.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But stay a while: let me be king till night,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That I may gaze upon this glittering crown;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So shall my eyes receive their last content,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My head, the latest honour due to it,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And jointly both yield up their wished right.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Continue ever, thou celestial sun;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let never silent night possess this clime;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Stand still, you watches of the element;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>All times and seasons, rest you at a stay,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That Edward may be still fair England’s king!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But day’s bright beams doth vanish fast away,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And needs I must resign my wished crown.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Inhuman creatures, nurs’d with tiger’s milk,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Why gape you for your sovereign’s overthrow?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My diadem, I mean, and guiltless life.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>See, monsters, see! I’ll wear my crown again.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>
										<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Putting on the crown.</i>
									</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What, fear you not the fury of your king?⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But, hapless Edward, thou art fondly led;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They pass not for thy frowns as late they did,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But seek to make a new-elected king;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which fills my mind with strange despairing thoughts,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which thoughts are martyred with endless torments;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And in this torment comfort find I none,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But that I feel the crown upon my head;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And therefore let me wear it yet a while.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Trus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My, lord, the parliament must have present news;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And therefore say, will you resign or no?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">The king rageth.</i> I’ll not resign, not whilst I live.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Traitors, be gone, and join you with Mortimer.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Elect, conspire, install, do what you will:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Their blood and yours shall seal these treacheries.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bishop of Winchester</td>
							<td>This answer we’ll return; and so, farewell. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Going with <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Trussel</b>.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leicester</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Call them again, my lord, and speak them fair;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For, if they go, the prince shall lose his right.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td>Call thou them back; I have no power to speak.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leicester</td>
							<td>My lord, the king is willing to resign.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bishop of Winchester</td>
							<td>If he be not, let him choose.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O, would I might! but heavens and earth conspire</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To make me miserable. Here, receive my crown.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Receive it? no, these innocent hands of mine</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall not be guilty of so foul a crime;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He of you all that most desires my blood,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And will be call’d the murderer of a king,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Take it. What, are you mov’d? pity you me?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then send for unrelenting Mortimer,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And Isabel, whose eyes being turn’d to steel</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Will sooner sparkle fire than shed a tear.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet stay; for, rather than I’ll look on them,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Here, here! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Gives the crown.</i>⁠—Now, sweet God of heaven,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Make me despise this transitory pomp,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And sit fot aye enthronised in heaven!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Come, death, and with thy fingers close my eyes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or, if I live, let me forget myself!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bishop of Winchester</td>
							<td>My lord⁠—</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Call me not lord; away, out of my sight!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ah, pardon me! grief makes me lunatic.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let not that Mortimer protect my son;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>More safety there is in a tiger’s jaws</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than his embracements. Bear this to the queen,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wet with my tears, and dried again with sighs: <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Gives a handkerchief.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>If with the sight thereof she be not mov’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Return it back, and dip it in my blood.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Commend me to my son, and bid him rule</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Better than I: yet how have I transgress’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unless it be with too much clemency?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Trus</td>
							<td>And thus, most humbly do we take our leave.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td>Farewell.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Bishop of Winchester</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Trussel</b> with the crown.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I know the next news that they bring</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Will be my death; and welcome shall it be:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To wretched men death is felicity.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leicester</td>
							<td>Another post! what news brings he?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Berkeley</b>, who gives a paper to <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Leicester</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Such news as I expect.⁠—Come, Berkeley, come,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And tell thy message to my naked breast.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Berkeley</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My lord, think not a thought so villainous</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Can harbour in a man of noble birth.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To do your highness service and devoir,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And save you from your foes, Berkeley would die.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leicester</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My lord, the council of the queen command</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That I resign my charge.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td>And who must keep me now? Must you, my lord?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Berkeley</td>
							<td>Ay, my most gracious lord; so ’tis decreed.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Taking the paper.</i> By Mortimer, whose name is written here!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Well may I rent his name that rends my heart. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Tears it.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>This poor revenge hath something eas’d my mind:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So may his limbs be torn as is this paper!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hear me, immortal Jove, and grant it too!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Berkeley</td>
							<td>Your grace must hence with me to Berkeley straight.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Whither you will: all places are alike,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And every earth is fit for burial.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leicester</td>
							<td>Favour him, my lord, as much as lieth in you.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Berkeley</td>
							<td>Even so betide my soul as I use him!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Mine enemy hath pitied my estate,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And that’s the cause that I am now remov’d.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Berkeley</td>
							<td>And thinks your grace that Berkeley will be cruel?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I know not; but of this am I assur’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That death ends all, and I can die but once.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Leicester, farewell.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leicester</td>
							<td>Not yet, my lord; I’ll bear you on your way.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-5-2" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
				</h3>
				<p>The Royal Palace, London.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Isabella</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Fair Isabel, now have we our desire;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The proud corrupters of the light-brain’d king</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have done their homage to the lofty gallows,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And he himself lies in captivity.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be rul’d by me, and we will rule the realm:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In any case take heed of childish fear,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For now we hold an old wolf by the ears,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That, if he slip, will seize upon us both,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And gripe the sorer, being grip’d himself.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Think therefore, madam, that imports us much</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To erect your son with all the speed we may,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And that I be protector over him:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For our behoof, ’twill bear the greater sway</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whenas a king’s name shall be under-writ.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Isabella</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Sweet Mortimer, the life of Isabel,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be thou persuaded that I love thee well;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And therefore, so the prince my son be safe,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whom I esteem as dear as these mine eyes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Conclude against his father what thou wilt,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And I myself will willingly subscribe.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>First would I hear news he were depos’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And then let me alone to handle him.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>Letters! from whence?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
							<td>From Killingworth, my lord?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Isabella</td>
							<td>How fares my lord the king?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
							<td>In health, madam, but full of pensiveness.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Isabella</td>
							<td>Alas, poor soul, would I could ease his grief!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Bishop of Winchester</b> with the crown.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thanks, gentle Winchester.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sirrah, be gone.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bishop of Winchester</td>
							<td>The king hath willingly resign’d his crown.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Isabella</td>
							<td>O, happy news! send for the prince my son.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bishop of Winchester</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Further, or this letter was seal’d, Lord Berkeley came,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So that he now is gone from Killingworth;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And we have heard that Edmund laid a plot</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To set his brother free; nor more but so.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The Lord of Berkeley is so pitiful</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As Leicester that had charge of him before.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Isabella</td>
							<td>Then let some other be his guardian.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Let me alone; here is the privy-seal⁠—</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Bishop of Winchester</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Who’s there? Call hither, Gurney and Matrevis.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To Attendants within.</i> To dash the heavy-headed Edmund’s drift,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Berkeley shall be discharg’d, the king remov’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And none but we shall know where he lieth.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Isabella</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>But, Mortimer, as long as he survives,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What safety rests for us or for my son?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td>Speak, shall he presently be despatch’d and die?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Isabella</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I would he were, so ’twere not by my means!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Matrevis</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gurney</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Enough.⁠—Matrevis, write a letter presently</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unto the Lord of Berkeley from ourself,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That he resign the king to thee and Gurney;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, when ’tis done, we will subscribe our name.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Matrevis</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>It shall be done, my lord. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Writes.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td>Gurney⁠—</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gurney</td>
							<td>My lord?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>As thou intend’st to rise by Mortimer,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who now makes Fortune’s wheel turn as he please,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Seek all the means thou canst to make him droop,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And neither give him kind word nor good look.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gurney</td>
							<td>I warrant you, my lord.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And this above the rest: because we hear</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That Edmund casts to work his liberty,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Remove him still from place to place by night,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Till at the last he come to Killingworth,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And then from thence to Berkeley back again;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And by the way, to make him fret the more,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Speak curstly to him; and in any case</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let no man comfort him, if he chance to weep,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But amplify his grief with bitter words.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Matrevis</td>
							<td>Fear not, my lord; we’ll do as you command.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td>So, now away! post thitherwards amain.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Isabella</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Whither goes this letter? to my lord the king?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Commend me humbly to his majesty,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And tell him that I labour all in vain</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To ease his grief and work his liberty;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And bear him this as witness of my love. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Gives ring.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Matrevis</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I will, madam. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit with Gurney.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Finely dissembled! do so still, sweet queen.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Here comes the young prince with the Earl of Kent.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Isabella</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Something he whispers in his childish ears.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>If he have such access unto the prince,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our plots and stratagems will soon be dash’d.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Isabella</td>
							<td>Use Edmund friendly, as if all were well.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince Edward</b>, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Kent</b> talking with him.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td>How fares my honourable Lord of Kent?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Kent</td>
							<td>In health, sweet Mortimer.⁠—How fares your grace?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Isabella</td>
							<td>Well, if my lord your brother were enlarg’d.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Kent</td>
							<td>I hear of late he hath depos’d himself.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Isabella</td>
							<td>The more my grief.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td>And mine.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Kent</td>
							<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside.</i> Ah, they do dissemble!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Isabella</td>
							<td>Sweet son, come hither; I must talk with thee.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>You, being his uncle and the next of blood,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Do look to be protector o’er the prince.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Kent</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Not I, my lord: who should protect the son,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But she that gave him life? I mean the queen.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Mother, persuade me not to wear the crown:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let him be king; I am too young to reign.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Isabella</td>
							<td>But be content, seeing ’tis his highness’ pleasure.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince Edward</td>
							<td>Let me but see him first, and then I will.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Kent</td>
							<td>Ay, do, sweet nephew.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Isabella</td>
							<td>Brother, you know it is impossible.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince Edward</td>
							<td>Why, is he dead?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Isabella</td>
							<td>No, God forbid!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Kent</td>
							<td>I would those words proceeded from your heart!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Inconstant Edmund, dost thou favour him,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That wast a cause of his imprisonment?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Kent</td>
							<td>The more cause now have I to make amends.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside to <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Isabella</b>.</i> I tell thee, ’tis not meet that one so false</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Should come about the person of a prince.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My lord, he hath betray’d the king his brother,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And therefore trust him not.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince Edward</td>
							<td>But he repents, and sorrows for it now.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Isabella</td>
							<td>Come, son, and go with this gentle lord and me.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince Edward</td>
							<td>With you I will, but not with Mortimer.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Why, youngling, ’sdain’st thou so of Mortimer?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then I will carry thee by force away.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince Edward</td>
							<td>Help, uncle Kent! Mortimer will wrong me.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Isabella</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Brother Edmund, strive not; we are his friends;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Isabel is nearer than the Earl of Kent.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Kent</td>
							<td>Sister, Edward is my charge; redeem him.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Isabella</td>
							<td>Edward is my son, and I will keep him.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Kent</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside.</i> Mortimer shall know that he hath wronged me.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hence will I haste to Killingworth Castle,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And rescue aged Edward from his foes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To be reveng’d on Mortimer and thee.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt, on the one side, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Isabella</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince Edward</b>, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</b>; on other other, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Kent</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-5-3" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Near Kenilworth Castle.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Matrevis</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gurney</b>, and Soldiers, with <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Matrevis</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My lord, be not pensive; we are your friends:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Men are ordain’d to live in misery;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Therefore, come; dalliance dangereth our lives.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Friends, whither must unhappy Edward go?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Will hateful Mortimer appoint no rest?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Must I be vexed like the nightly bird,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose sight is loathsome to all winged fowls?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When will the fury of his mind assuage?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When will his heart be satisfied with blood?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If mine will serve, unbowel straight this breast,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And give my heart to Isabel and him:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It is the chiefest mark they level at.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gurney</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Not so, my liege: the queen hath given this charge,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To keep your grace in safety:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your passions make your dolours to increase.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>This usage makes my misery increase.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But can my air of life continue long,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When all my senses are annoy’d with stench?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Within a dungeon England’s king is kept,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where I am starv’d for want of sustenance;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My daily diet is heartbreaking sobs,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That almost rent the closet of my heart:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thus lives old Edward not reliev’d by any,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And so must die, though pitied by many.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O, water, gentle friends, to cool my thirst,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And clear my body from foul excrements!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Matrevis</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Here’s channel-water, as our charge is given:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sit down, for we’ll be barbers to your grace.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Traitors, away! what, will you murder me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of choke your sovereign with puddle-water?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gurney</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>No, but wash your face, and shave away your beard,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lest you be known, and so be rescued.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Matrevis</td>
							<td>Why strive you thus? your labour is in vain.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The wren may strive against the lion’s strength,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But all in vain: so vainly do I strive</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To seek for mercy at a tyrant’s hand.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">They wash him with puddle-water, and shave his beard away.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Immortal powers, that know the painful cares</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That wait upon my poor distressed soul,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O, level all your looks upon these daring men</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That wrong their liege and sovereign, England’s king!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O Gaveston, it is for thee that I am wrong’d!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For me both thou and both the Spensers died;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And for your sakes a thousand wrongs I’ll take.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The Spensers’ ghosts, wherever they remain,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wish well to mine; then, tush, for them I’ll die.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Matrevis</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>’Twixt theirs and yours shall be no enmity.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Come, come, away! Now put the torches out:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We’ll enter in by darkness to Killingworth.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gurney</td>
							<td>How now! who comes there?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Kent</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Matrevis</td>
							<td>Guard the king sure: it is the Earl of Kent.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td>O gentle brother, help to rescue me!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Matrevis</td>
							<td>Keep them asunder; thrust in the king.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Kent</td>
							<td>Soldiers, let me but talk to him one word.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gurney</td>
							<td>Lay hands upon the earl for his assault.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Kent</td>
							<td>Lay down your weapons, traitors! yield the king!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Matrevis</td>
							<td>Edmund, yield thou thyself, or thou shalt die.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Kent</td>
							<td>Base villains, wherefore do you gripe me thus?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gurney</td>
							<td>Bind him, and so convey him to the court.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Kent</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Where is the court but here? here is the king</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And I will visit him: why stay you me?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Matrevis</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The court is where Lord Mortimer remains:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thither shall your honour go; and so, farewell.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Matrevis</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gurney</b> with <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Kent</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O, miserable is that commonweal,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where lords keep courts, and kings are lock’d in prison!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Soldier</td>
							<td>Wherefore stay we? on, sirs, to the court!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Kent</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ay, lead me whither you will, even to my death,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Seeing that my brother cannot be releas’d.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-5-4" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</span>
				</h3>
				<p>The Royal Palace, London.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The king must die, or Mortimer goes down;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The commons now begin to pity him:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet he that is the cause of Edward’s death,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is sure to pay for it when his son’s of age;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And therefore will I do it cunningly.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This letter, written by a friend of ours,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Contains his death, yet bids then save his life;</span>
									<br/>
									<span><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Reads.</i> “<i xml:lang="la">Edwardum occidere nolite timere, bonum est</i>,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fear not to kill the king, ’tis good he die.”</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But read it thus, and that’s another sense;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>“<i xml:lang="la">Edwardum occidere nolite, timere bonum est</i>,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Kill not the king, ’tis good to fear the worst.”</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unpointed as it is, thus shall it go.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That, being dead, if it chance to be found,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Matrevis and the rest may bear the blame,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And we be quit that caus’d it to be done.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Within this room is lock’d the messenger</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That shall convey it, and perform the rest;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, by a secret token that he bears,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall he be murder’d when the deed is done.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lightborn, come forth!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lightborn</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>Art thou so resolute as thou wast?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lightborn</td>
							<td>What else, my lord? and far more resolute.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td>And hast thou cast how to accomplish it?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lightborn</td>
							<td>Ay, ay; and none shall know which way he died.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td>But at his looks, Lightborn, thou wilt relent.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lightborn</td>
							<td>Relent! ha, ha! I use much to relent.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td>Well, do it bravely, and be secret.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lightborn</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>You shall not need to give instructions;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>’Tis not the first time I have kill’d a man:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I learn’d in Naples how to poison flowers;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To strangle with a lawn thrust down the throat;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To pierce the wind pipe with a needle’s point;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or, whilst one is asleep, to take a quill,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And blow a little powder in his ears;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or open his mouth, and pour quicksilver down.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But yet I have a braver way than these.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td>What’s that?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lightborn</td>
							<td>Nay, you shall pardon me; none shall know my tricks.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I care not how it is, so it be not spied.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Deliver this to Gurney and Matrevis: <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Gives letter.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>At every ten-mile end thou hast a horse:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Take this: <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Gives money.</i> away, and never see me more!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lightborn</td>
							<td>No?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td>No; unless thou bring me news of Edward’s death.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lightborn</td>
							<td>That will I quickly do. Farewell, my lord. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The prince I rule, the queen do I command,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And with a lowly congé to the ground</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The proudest lords salute me as I pass;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I seal, I cancel, I do what I will.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fear’d am I more than lov’d;⁠—let me be fear’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, when I frown, make all the court look pale.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I view the prince with Aristarchus’ eyes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose looks were as a breeching to a boy.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They thrust upon me the protectorship,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And sue to me for that that I desire;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>While at the council-table, grave enough,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And not unlike a bashful puritan,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>First I complain of imbecility,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Saying it is <i xml:lang="la">onus quam gravissimum</i>;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Till, being interrupted by my friends,</span>
									<br/>
									<span><i xml:lang="la">Suscepi</i> that <i xml:lang="la">provinciam</i>, as they term it;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, to conclude, I am Protector now.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now all is sure: the queen and Mortimer</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall rule the realm, the king; and none rule us.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Mine enemies will I plague, my friends advance;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And what I list command who dare control?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>
										<i xml:lang="la">Major sum quam cui possit fortuna nocere:</i>
									</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And that this be the coronation-day,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It pleaseth me and Isabel the queen. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Trumpets within.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>The trumpets sound; I must go take my place.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span></b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Isabella</b>, the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Archbishop of Canterbury</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Champion</b>, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Nobles</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Archbishop of Canterbury</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Long live King Edward, by the grace of God</span>
									<br/>
									<span>King of England and Lord of Ireland!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Champion</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>If any Christian, Heathen, Turk, or Jew,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Dares but affirm that Edward’s not true king,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And will avouch his saying with the sword,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am the Champion that will combat him.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td>None comes: sound, trumpets! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Trumpets.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span></td>
							<td>Champion, here’s to thee. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Gives purse.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Isabella</td>
							<td>Lord Mortimer, now take him to your charge.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter Soldiers with <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Kent</b> prisoner.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td>What traitor have we there with blades and bills?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Soldier</td>
							<td>Edmund the Earl of Kent.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span></td>
							<td>What hath he done?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Soldier</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>’A would have taken the king away perforce,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As we were bringing him to Killingworth.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td>Did you attempt his rescue, Edmund? speak.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Kent</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Mortimer, I did: he is our king,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And thou compell’st this prince to wear the crown.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td>Strike off his head: he shall have martial law.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Kent</td>
							<td>Strike off my head! base traitor, I defy thee!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span></td>
							<td>My lord, he is my uncle, and shall live.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td>My lord, he is your enemy, and shall die.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Kent</td>
							<td>Stay, villains!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span></td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Sweet mother, if I cannot pardon him,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Entreat my Lord Protector for his life.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Isabella</td>
							<td>Son, be content: I dare not speak a word.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span></td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Nor I; and yet methinks I should command:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But, seeing I cannot, I’ll entreat for him.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My lord, if you will let my uncle live,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I will requite it when I come to age.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>’Tis for your highness’ good and for the realm’s.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How often shall I bid you bear him hence?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Kent</td>
							<td>Art thou king? must I die at thy command?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td>At our command.⁠—Once more, away with him!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Kent</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Let me but stay and speak; I will not go:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Either my brother or his son is king,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And none of both them thirst for Edmund’s blood:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And therefore, soldiers, whither will you hale me?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Soldiers hale <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Kent</b> away, and carry him to be beheaded.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span></td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What safety may I look for at his hands,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If that my uncle shall be murder’d thus?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Isabella</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Fear not, sweet boy; I’ll guard thee from thy foes:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Had Edmund liv’d, he would have sought thy death.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Come, son, we’ll ride a-hunting in the park.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span></td>
							<td>And shall my uncle Edmund ride with us?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Isabella</td>
							<td>He is a traitor; think not on him: come.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-5-5" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Berkeley Castle.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Matrevis</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gurney</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Matrevis</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Gurney, I wonder the king dies not,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Being in a vault up to the knees in water,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To which the channels of the castle run,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From whence a damp continually ariseth,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That were enough to poison any man,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Much more a king, brought up so tenderly.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gurney</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And so do I, Matrevis: yesternight</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I open’d but the door to throw him meat,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And I was almost stifled with the savour.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Matrevis</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>He hath a body able to endure</span>
									<br/>
									<span>More than we can inflict: and therefore now</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let us assail his mind another while.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gurney</td>
							<td>Send for him out thence, and I will anger him.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Matrevis</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>But stay; who’s this?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lightborn</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lightborn</td>
							<td>My Lord Protector greets you. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Gives letter.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gurney</td>
							<td>What’s there? I know not how to construe it.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Matrevis</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Gurney, it was left unpointed for the nonce;</span>
									<br/>
									<span><i xml:lang="la">Edwardum occidere nolite timere</i>,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That’s his meaning.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lightborn</td>
							<td>Know you this token? I must have the king. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Gives token.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Matrevis</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside.</i> Ay, stay a while; thou shalt have answer straight.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This villain’s sent to make away the king.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gurney</td>
							<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside.</i> I thought as much.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Matrevis</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside.</i> And when the murder’s done,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>See how he must be handled for his labour⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span><i xml:lang="la">Pereat iste!</i> Let him have the king;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What else?⁠—Here is the keys, this is the lake:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Do as you are commanded by my lord.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lightborn</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I know what I must do. Get you away:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet be not far off; I shall need your help:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>See that in the next room I have a fire,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And get me a spit, and let it be red-hot.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Matrevis</td>
							<td>Very well.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gurney</td>
							<td>Need you anything besides?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lightborn</td>
							<td>What else? a table and a featherbed.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gurney</td>
							<td>That’s all?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lightborn</td>
							<td>Ay, ay: so, when I call you, bring it in.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Matrevis</td>
							<td>Fear not thou that.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gurney</td>
							<td>Here’s a light to go into the dungeon.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Gives light to <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lightborn</b>, and then exit with <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Matrevis</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lightborn</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>So, now.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Must I about this gear: ne’er was there any</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So finely handled as this king shall be.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Foh, here’s a place indeed with all my heart!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td>Who’s there? what light is that? wherefore com’st thou?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lightborn</td>
							<td>To comfort you, and bring you joyful news.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Small comfort finds poor Edward in thy looks:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Villain, I know thou com’st to murder me.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lightborn</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>To murder you, my most gracious lord?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Far is it from my heart to do you harm.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The queen sent me to see how you were us’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For she relents at this your misery:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And what eye can refrain from shedding tears,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To see a king in this most piteous state?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Weep’st thou already? list a while to me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And then thy heart, were it as Gurney’s is,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or as Matrevis’, hewn from the Caucasus,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet will it melt ere I have done my tale.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This dungeon where they keep me is the sink</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wherein the filth of all the castle falls.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lightborn</td>
							<td>O villains!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And there, in mire and puddle, have I stood</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This ten days’ space; and, lest that I should sleep,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>One plays continually upon a drum;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They give me bread and water, being a king;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So that, for want of sleep and sustenance,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My mind’s distemper’d, and my body’s numb’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And whether I have limbs or no I know not.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O, would my blood dropp’d out from every vein,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As doth this water from my tatter’d robes!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Tell Isabel the queen, I look’d not thus,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When for her sake I ran at tilt in France,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And there unhors’d the Duke of Cleremont.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lightborn</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O, speak no more, my lord! this breaks my heart.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lie on this bed, and rest yourself a while.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>These looks of thine can harbour naught but death;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I see my tragedy written in thy brows.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet stay a while; forbear thy bloody hand,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And let me see the stroke before it comes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That even then when I shall lose my life,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My mind may be more steadfast on my God.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lightborn</td>
							<td>What means your highness to mistrust me thus?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td>What mean’st thou to dissemble with me thus?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lightborn</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>These hands were never stain’d with innocent blood,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor shall they now be tainted with a king’s.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Forgive my thought for having such a thought.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>One jewel have I left; receive thou this: <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Gives jewel.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>Still fear I, and I know not what’s the cause,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But every joint shakes as I give it thee.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O, if thou harbour’st murder in thy heart,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let this gift change thy mind, and save thy soul!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Know that I am a king: O, at that name</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I feel a hell of grief! where is my crown?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Gone, gone! and do I still remain alive?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lightborn</td>
							<td>You’re overwatch’d, my lord: lie down and rest.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>But that grief keeps me waking, I should sleep;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For not these ten days have these eyelids clos’d.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now, as I speak, they fall; and yet with fear</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Open again. O, wherefore sitt’st thou here?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lightborn</td>
							<td>If you mistrust me, I’ll be gone, my lord.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>No, no; for, if thou mean’st to murder me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou wilt return again; and therefore stay. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Sleeps.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lightborn</td>
							<td>He sleeps.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Waking.</i> O, let me not die yet! O, stay a while!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lightborn</td>
							<td>How now, my lord!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Something still buzzeth in mine ears,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And tells me, if I sleep, I never wake:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This fear is that which makes me tremble thus;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And therefore tell me, wherefore art thou come?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lightborn</td>
							<td>To rid thee of thy life.⁠—Matrevis, come!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Matrevis</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gurney</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I am too weak and feeble to resist.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Assist me, sweet God, and receive my soul!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lightborn</td>
							<td>Run for the table.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O, spare me, or despatch me in a trice!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>
										<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Matrevis</b> brings in a table.</i>
									</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lightborn</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>So, lay the table down, and stamp on it,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But not too hard, lest that you bruise his body.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</b> is murdered.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Matrevis</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I fear me that this cry will raise the town,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And therefore let us take horse and away.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lightborn</td>
							<td>Tell me, sirs, was it not bravely done?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gurney</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Excellent well: take this for thy reward. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Stabs <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lightborn</b>, who dies.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>Come, let us cast the body in the moat,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And bear the king’s to Mortimer our lord:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Away!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt with the bodies.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-5-6" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
				</h3>
				<p>The Royal Palace, London.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Matrevis</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Is’t done, Matrevis, and the murderer dead?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Matrevis</td>
							<td>Ay, my good lord: I would it were undone!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Matrevis, if thou now grow’st penitent,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll be thy ghostly father; therefore choose,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whether thou wilt be secret in this,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or else die by the hand of Mortimer.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Matrevis</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Gurney, my lord, is fled, and will, I fear,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Betray us both; therefore let me fly.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td>Fly to the savages!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Matrevis</td>
							<td>I humbly thank your honour. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>As for myself, I stand as Jove’s huge tree,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And others are but shrubs compar’d to me:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>All tremble at my name, and I fear none:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let’s see who dare impeach me for his death!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Isabella</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Isabella</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ah, Mortimer, the king my son hath news,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His father’s dead, and we have murder’d him!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td>What if he have? the king is yet a child.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Isabella</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ay, but he tears his hair, and wrings his hands,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And vows to be reveng’d upon us both.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Into the council-chamber he is gone,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To crave the aid and succour of his peers.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ay me, see where he comes, and they with him!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now, Mortimer, begins our tragedy.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span></b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lords</b>, and Attendants.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Lord</td>
							<td>Fear not, my lord; know that you are a king.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span></td>
							<td>Villain!⁠—</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td>Ho, now, my lord!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span></td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Think not that I am frighted with thy words:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My father’s murder’d through thy treachery;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And thou shalt die, and on his mournful hearse</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy hateful and accursed head shall lie,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To witness to the world that by thy means</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His kingly body was too soon interr’d.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Isabella</td>
							<td>Weep not, sweet son.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span></td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Forbid not me to weep; he was my father;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And had you lov’d him half so well as I,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You could not bear his death thus patiently:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But you, I fear, conspir’d with Mortimer.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Lord</td>
							<td>Why speak you not unto my lord the king?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Because I think scorn to be accus’d.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who is the man dares say I murder’d him?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span></td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Traitor, in me my loving father speaks,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And plainly saith, ’twas thou that murder’dst him.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td>But hath your grace no other proof than this?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span></td>
							<td>Yes, if this be the hand of Mortimer. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Showing letter.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside to <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Isabella</b>.</i> False Gurney hath betray’d me and himself.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Isabella</td>
							<td>I fear’d as much: murder can not be hid.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td>It is my hand; what gather you by this?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span></td>
							<td>That thither thou didst send a murderer.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td>What murderer? bring forth the man I sent.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span></td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ah, Mortimer, thou know’st that he is slain!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And so shalt thou be too.⁠—Why stays he here?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Bring him unto a hurdle, drag him forth;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hang him, I say, and set his quarters up:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And bring his head back presently to me.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Isabella</td>
							<td>For my sake, sweet son, pity Mortimer!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Madam, entreat not: I will rather die</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than sue for life unto a paltry boy.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span></td>
							<td>Hence with the traitor, with the murderer!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Base Fortune, now I see, that in thy wheel</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There is a point, to which when men aspire,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They tumble headlong down: that point I touch’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, seeing there was no place to mount up higher,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Why should I grieve at my declining fall?⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Farewell, fair queen: weep not for Mortimer,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That scorns the world, and, as a traveller,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Goes to discover countries yet unknown.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span></td>
							<td>What, suffer you the traitor to delay?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</b> with <b epub:type="z3998:persona">First Lord</b> and some of the Attendants.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Isabella</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>As thou receivest thy life from me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Spill not the blood of gentle Mortimer!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span></td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>This argues that you spilt my father’s blood,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Else would you not entreat for Mortimer.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Isabella</td>
							<td>I spill his blood! no.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span></td>
							<td>Ay, madam, you; for so the rumour runs.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Isabella</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>That rumour is untrue: for loving thee,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is this report rais’d on poor Isabel.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span></td>
							<td>I do not think her so unnatural.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Lord</td>
							<td>My lord, I fear me it will prove too true.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span></td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Mother, you are suspected for his death</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And therefore we commit you to the Tower,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Till further trial may be made thereof.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If you be guilty, though I be your son,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Think not to find me slack or pitiful.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Isabella</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Nay, to my death; for too long have I liv’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whenas my son thinks to abridge my days.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span></td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Away with her! her words enforce these tears,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And I shall pity her, if she speak again.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Isabella</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Shall I not mourn for my beloved lord?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And with the rest accompany him to his grave.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Lord</td>
							<td>Thus, madam, ’tis the king’s will you shall hence.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Isabella</td>
							<td>He hath forgotten me: stay; I am his mother.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Lord</td>
							<td>That boots not; therefore, gentle madam, go.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Isabella</td>
							<td>Then come, sweet death, and rid me of this grief! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit with <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Lord</b> and some of the Attendants.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Re-enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">First Lord</b>, with the head of <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Younger Mortimer</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Lord</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My lord, here is the head of Mortimer.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span></td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Go fetch my father’s hearse, where it shall lie;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And bring my funeral robes.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt Attendants.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Accursed head,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Could I have rul’d thee then, as I do now,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou hadst not hatch’d this monstrous treachery!⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Here comes the hearse: help me to mourn, my lords.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Re-enter Attendants, with the hearse and funeral robes.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Sweet father, here unto thy murder’d ghost</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I offer up the wicked traitor’s head;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And let these tears, distilling from mine eyes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be witness of my grief and innocency.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
